#!/bin/bash

SCDIR=../plot-scripts

ncl $SCDIR/ts-plots.ncl
ps2eps -f -l ts-plots.ps
epstopdf ts-plots.eps
/bin/rm -f ts-plots.ps ts-plots.eps

ncl $SCDIR/sp-plots.ncl
ps2eps -f -l sp-plots.ps
epstopdf sp-plots.eps
/bin/rm -f sp-plots.ps sp-plots.eps

ncl $SCDIR/pp-plots.ncl
ps2eps -f -l pp-plots.ps
epstopdf pp-plots.eps
/bin/rm -f pp-plots.ps pp-plots.eps

ncl $SCDIR/evap-plots.ncl
ps2eps -f -l evap-plots.ps
epstopdf evap-plots.eps
/bin/rm -f evap-plots.ps evap-plots.eps

ncl $SCDIR/pmine-plots.ncl
ps2eps -f -l pmine-plots.ps
epstopdf pmine-plots.eps
/bin/rm -f pmine-plots.ps pmine-plots.eps

ncl $SCDIR/z500-plots.ncl
ps2eps -f -l z500-plots.ps
epstopdf z500-plots.eps
/bin/rm -f z500-plots.ps z500-plots.eps

ncl $SCDIR/wind-plots.ncl
ps2eps -f -l wind-plots.ps
epstopdf wind-plots.eps
/bin/rm -f wind-plots.ps wind-plots.eps

ncl $SCDIR/orog-plots.ncl
ps2eps -f -l orog-plots.ps
epstopdf orog-plots.eps
/bin/rm -f orog-plots.ps orog-plots.eps
